## **DLSU Business & Economics Review** 

Volume 20 Number 2 January Issue 

Article 6 

## 1-1-2011 

## **Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitoring System (CBMS) Data** 

## Rechel G. Arcilla 

De La Salle University, Manila, rechel.arcilla@dlsu.edu.ph 

## Frumencio F. Co 

De La Salle University, Manila, frumencio.co@dlsu.edu.ph 

## Shirlee R. Ocampo 

De La Salle University, Manila, shirlee.ocampo@dlsu.edu.ph 

Follow this and additional works at: https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber 

Part of the Accounting Commons, Economics Commons, Finance and Financial Management Commons, and the Marketing Commons 

## **Recommended Citation** 

Arcilla, Rechel G.; Co, Frumencio F.; and Ocampo, Shirlee R. (2011) "Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitoring System (CBMS) Data," DLSU Business & Economics Review: Vol. 20: No. 2, Article 6. 

DOI: https://doi.org/10.59588/2243-786X.1328 Available at: https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber/vol20/iss2/6 

This Research Article is brought to you for free and open access by the DLSU Publications at Animo Repository. It has been accepted for inclusion in DLSU Business & Economics Review by an authorized editor of Animo Repository. 

Arcilla et al.: Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitori 

_DLSU Business & Economics Review_ 20.2 (2011), pp. 33-43 

## Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitoring System (CBMS) Data 

**Rechel G. Arcilla** De La Salle University rechel.arcilla@dlsu.edu.ph 

**Frumencio F. Co** De La Salle University frumencio.co@dlsu.edu.ph 

**Shirlee R. Ocampo** De La Salle University shirlee.ocampo@dlsu.edu.ph 

This study identified correlates of poverty for Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque representing an urban and a rural area in the Philippines, respectively, by utilizing the 2005 census data from its Community-Based Monitoring System. Regression models with the arcsine of the square root of barangay level poverty incidence as dependent variable were investigated which allowed the identification of the correlates of poverty at the barangay level. Results showed that the significant correlates of barangay poverty incidence were average household size, proportion of households whose housing units/lot are not owned and proportion of households who own telephone/cellphone. Furthermore, lower poverty incidences were observed in barangays located in an urban area. 

_**Keywords:**_ poverty, poverty incidence, correlates of poverty, community-based monitoring system 

For purposes of eradicating poverty, information is required about the poor and their circumstances – who they are, where they live, what social and economic conditions they face, how they respond to programs and projects intended for them, and so forth. With such poverty profile, Local Government Units (LGUs) can prepare comprehensive development plans geared towards poverty reduction, among others. Through its improved design and 

implementation, benefits of poverty alleviation efforts are maximized. A very vital tool in this undertaking is statistical data. 

The National Statistics Office (NSO) is the main source of official statistics in the Philippines that LGUs and policy makers relied on when they formulate policies and implement projects and programs geared towards poverty reduction. With the Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES) they conduct every three years, poverty statistics 

Copyright  ©   2011  De La Salle University, Philippines 

Published by Animo Repository, 2011 

1 

DLSU Business & Economics Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 [2011], Art. 6 

34 DLSU BUSINESS & ECONOMICS REVIEW 

VOL. 20  NO. 2 

are being computed down to the provincial level with an acceptable measure of reliability. 

However, poverty statistics at smaller geographical division such as municipalities/cities and barangays are needed to better implement and monitor poverty reduction strategies. Although small area estimation methodologies are currently being employed that utilizes information from surveys and censuses, alternative approaches to generating small area poverty statistics is needed that utilizes baseline information that will complement the official poverty statistics being generated by NSO. 

## _**Objectives of the Study**_ 

The primary objective of this study was to determine correlates of poverty, utilizing the data from the Community-Based Monitoring System (CBMS) for effective beneficiary targeting. Specifically, this study aimed to (1) generate poverty incidence at the barangay level using the CBMS data set from Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque, an urban and a rural area, respectively; and (2) determine the correlates of poverty and generate poverty models useful for monitoring purposes in these areas. 

Generated poverty incidences can be used in determining the poverty situation at the barangay level which can aid LGUs in their local level program and policy development. Coupled with identified correlates of poverty, LGUs’ ability to target the most needy can be enhanced. 

Furthermore, such correlates of poverty can be used for evaluating existing programs and projects that will determine if they work or not, and will indicate what changes are needed for better utilization of resources and targeting of beneficiaries. 

## **METHODOLOGY** 

The study utilized CBMS data collected from Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque in the Philippines during the 2005 census year. The 

data were a complete enumeration of 65,117 households in 201 barangays in Pasay City, and 6,650 households in 38 barangays in Mogpog, Marinduque. 

Variables included in the study were those that are available across LGUs of Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque. It included demographic and socio-economic characteristics of the households from which several indices were created to facilitate the model-building process. 

Using the reported total income of the household, a household’s per capita income was computed as the household’s total income divided by the size of the household. The poverty status of the household, whether poor or non-poor, was then determined following the official methodology of the Philippines for poverty measurement. That is, a household was classified as poor if its per capita income is below the poverty threshold, the per capita income necessary to meet basic food and non-food needs of a household. Otherwise, the household was classified as non-poor (National Statistical Coordination Board [NSCB], 2006). For 2005, NSCB estimated the poverty thresholds for Pasay City at Php 18,723 and for Marinduque at Php 13,859. 

With the barangay as small area unit, the poverty incidences were estimated by taking the ratio of the total number of poor households to the total number of households in that barangay. In the model-building process, this poverty incidence at the barangay level was considered as the variable whose values are to be predicted. The independent variables or predictors in the model were the indices constructed based on the available variables. 

In generating poverty profiles for Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque, bivariate analyses were performed that allowed the characterization of the poor. Because some of the variables were in the nominal scale such as gender of the household head, while others were in at least ordinal scale such as size of the household, both contingency and correlation analyses were performed at 5% level of significance to identify the correlates of poverty. 

https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber/vol20/iss2/6 DOI: 10.59588/2243-786X.1328 

2 

Arcilla et al.: Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitori 

CORRELatES Of pOVERty: EVIDENCE fROM thE CBMS Data 

aRCILLa, R.g., Et aL. 35 

Multivariate analysis was likewise performed to determine determinants of barangay poverty incidence. This regression model of the poverty situation at the barangay level allowed the investigation of the effects of a particular aggregated correlate of poverty conditional on the levels of the other identified correlates. 

Because the response variable were proportions, the regression model was specified as 

**==> picture [100 x 19] intentionally omitted <==**

where _Yi_ is the poverty incidence of the i[th] barangay, b is the vector of regression coefficients, _Xi_ is the vector of indices based on the identified correlates of poverty, and e i is the regression model noise. The arcsine transformation allows proportions to be made nearly “normal”. 

Residual analyses were performed to determine if underlying assumptions of the linear regression model were satisfied. Assumptions investigated included normality with the use of the ShapiroWilk’s test statistic, independence with the use of the Durbin-Watson test statistic, and absence of multicollinearity among independent variables with the use of the tolerance and variance inflation statistics. 

All results were generated using the Statistical Analysis System (SAS) software. 

## **RESULTS AND DISCUSSION** 

_**Poverty Incidence.**_ Poverty incidence indicated that 101 of the 201 barangays in Pasay City had poverty incidence estimates of at most 10.0% (Table 1). The distribution of poverty incidence in Pasay City was skewed to right, with only 3.5% of the barangays having poverty incidences greater than 30%. The poorest barangay had a poverty incidence of 42.1%, while one barangay had no poor household. 

On the other hand, all of the 36 barangays in Mogpog, Marinduque had poverty incidence estimates higher than 20%. This was expected since Mogpog, Marinduque is classified as a rural area and studies have shown that location attributes (whether urban or rural) determine living standard of households (Balisacan, 1997; Albert & Collado,  2004). In particular, households located in urban areas were betteroff relative to those in rural areas. Hence, the distribution of poverty incidence was observed to be skewed to the left, with nearly 70% of the barangays having poverty incidences greater than 60%. Also, the poorest barangay had a poverty incidence as high as 93.62%.  That is, nine out of 10 households in this barangay were poor. The least poverty incidence among the barangays in Mogpog, Marinduque was 28.22%. 

## **Table 1** 

_Percentage distribution of poverty incidence by area, 2005_ 

|**POVERTY INCIDENCE (%)**|**AREA**|**AREA**|
|---|---|---|
||**Pasay City**|**Mogpog, Marinduque**|
|<= 10<br>11 – 20<br>21 – 30<br>31 – 40<br>41 – 50<br>51 – 60<br>61 – 70<br>71 – 80<br>81 – 90<br>> 90|50.3<br>32.3<br>13.9<br>3.0<br>0.5<br>0.0<br>0.0<br>0.0<br>0.0<br>0.0|0.0<br>0.0<br>2.8<br>11.1<br>11.1<br>5.6<br>27.8<br>16.7<br>19.4<br>5.6|



Published by Animo Repository, 2011 

3 

DLSU Business & Economics Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 [2011], Art. 6 

36 DLSU BUSINESS & ECONOMICS REVIEW 

VOL. 20  NO. 2 

_**Correlates of Poverty.**_ Several household demographic characteristics are significant indicators of higher poverty incidence in both Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque: “male household head”, “without OFW”, and “with handicapped” (Table 2).  There was also a very evident trend wherein the lower the household head’s educational level, the higher the poverty incidence. 

From Table 3, engagement in the following economic activities was found to be significant indicators of poverty incidence for both Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque: engagement in crop farming/gardening, livestock, transportation/ storage/communication, and construction. But other economic characteristics of households were found to be significant on only one area since some data were not available for the other area. 

Table 2 

_Distribution of poor households by demographic characteristics and area_ 

|**VARIABLE**|**CATEGORIES**|**PASAY CITY**|**PASAY CITY**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|
|**SEX**<br>(Sex of Household<br>Head)|Female|9.2|< 0.0001|54.0|< 0.0001|
||Male|14.9||69.3||
|**EDUC**<br>(Highest educational<br>attainment of<br>household head)|No grade completed|30.3|< 0.0001|76.1|< 0.0001|
||Elementary undergraduate|24.6||77.1||
||Elementary graduate|22.4||74.5||
||Highschoolundergraduate|24.3||71.5||
||Highschoolgraduate|14.2||62.7||
||College undergraduate|9.6||46.9||
||College graduate and beyond|3.7||27.1||
|**OFWIND**<br>(OFW indicator)|Without OFW|14.4|< 0.0001|69.0|< 0.0001|
||With OFW|5.0||23.3||
|**UNIPARENT**<br>(Single-parent<br>indicator)|Without single parent|13.6|0.3873|66.0|0.0517|
||With single parent|14.0||70.7||
|**THIRDSEX**<br>(Third sex indicator)|Without third sex|13.6|0.0006|N.A.|N.A.|
||With third sex|18.2||||
|**HANDICAPPED**<br>(Handicapped<br>indicator)|Without handicapped|13.4|< 0.0001|65.7|0.0022|
||With handicapped|22.2||71.7||
|**BOARDIND**<br>(Boarder / bedspacer<br>Indicator)|Without boarder / bedspacer|13.2|< 0.0001|N.A.|N.A.|
||With boarder / bedspacer|9.0||||
|**ORGIND**<br>(Member of<br>any community<br>organization)|Not a member|N.A.|N.A.|69.2|< 0.0001|
||Member|||55.9||



N.A. - not available. 

https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber/vol20/iss2/6 DOI: 10.59588/2243-786X.1328 

4 

Arcilla et al.: Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitori 

CORRELatES Of pOVERty: EVIDENCE fROM thE CBMS Data 

aRCILLa, R.g., Et aL. 37 

## **Table 3** 

_Distribution of poor households by economic activities and area_ 

|**VARIABLE**|**CATEGORIES**|**PASAY CITY**|**PASAY CITY**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|
|**JOBIND**<br>(Job/work indicator)|Without|13.3|0.1118|59.5|< 0.0001|
||With|13.7||68.7||
|**CROPIND**<br>(Engaged in crop farming and<br>gardening)|Not engaged|13.7|< 0.0001|63.9|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|7.3||70.5||
|**POULTIND**<br>(Engaged in livestock /poultry)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0300|59.7|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|7.5||71.9||
|**FISHIND**<br>(Engaged in fishing)|Not engaged|13.6|0.3320|62.1|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|17.6||82.7||
|**FORIND**<br>(Engaged in forestry)|Not engaged|13.6|0.1757|64.4|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|7.8||72.3||
|**SALIND**<br>(Engaged in wholesale / retail)|Not engaged|13.6|0.5569|68.5|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|13.8||57.6||
|**PUBLIND**<br>(Engaged inpublishing)|Not engaged|13.6|0.1143|N.A.|N.A.|
||Engaged|9.1||||
|**MANIND**<br>(Engaged in manufacturing)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0768|66.2|0.1806|
||Engaged|11.0||70.6||
|**MAINTIND**<br>(Engaged in maintenance<br>services)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0296|N.A.|N.A.|
||Engaged|16.0||||
|**FOODIND**<br>(Engaged in food services)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0086|N.A.|N.A.|
||Engaged|10.2||||
|**ENTERTAIN**(Engaged in<br>entertainment services)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0009|N.A.|N.A.|
||Engaged|7.0||||
|**SERVIND**<br>(Engaged in community, social &<br>personal services)|Not engaged|13.6|0.9337|66.5|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|13.5||43.8||
|**COMPUTIND**<br>(Engaged in computer<br>communication)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0012|N.A.|N.A.|
||Engaged|6.9||||
|**TRNIND**<br>(Engaged in transpo, storage &<br>comm.)|Not engaged|13.3|< 0.0001|67.1|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|17.9||59.0||
|**MININD**<br>(Engaged in mining & quarrying)|Not engaged|13.6|0.7513|65.9|< 0.0001|
||Engaged|14.8||85.2||
|**CNSIND**<br>(Engaged in construction)|Not engaged|13.5|< 0.0001|65.7|0.0018|
||Engaged|19.2||71.8||
|**EOTHIND**<br>(Engaged in other activities NEC)|Not engaged|13.6|0.0509|66.3|0.8414|
||Engaged|16.7||65.3||



N.A. - not available. 

Published by Animo Repository, 2011 

5 

DLSU Business & Economics Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 [2011], Art. 6 

38 DLSU BUSINESS & ECONOMICS REVIEW 

VOL. 20  NO. 2 

## **Table 4** 

_Distribution of poor households by household’s basic needs and area_ 

|**VARIABLE**|**CATEGORIES**|**PASAY CITY**|**PASAY CITY**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|
|**TENUR**<br>(Tenure status of<br>house / lot)|Owner,  owner-like … house and lot|9.5|< 0.0001|57.2|< 0.0001|
||Rent house / room including lot|15.6||52.9||
||Own house / rent lot|14.2||73.5||
||Own house /rent-free lot with consent|17.1||78.7||
||Own house /rent-free lot without consent|25.2||82.6||
||Rent-free hse and lot with consent|13.6||73.6||
||Rent-free hse and lot without consent|28.9||86.7||
||Other|43.3||72.7||
|**HTYPE**<br>(House type)|Single house|13.2|< 0.0001|N.A.|N.A.|
||Duplex|15.6||||
||Apartment . . .|10.5||||
||Commercial . . .|12.2||||
||Other|36.6||||
|**WALL**<br>(Construction<br>materials of walls)|Strong|10.3|< 0.0001|54.4|< 0.0001|
||Light|26.3||83.0||
||Salvaged / makeshift|30.0||88.3||
||Mixed but predominantly strong|20.0||67.0||
||Mixed but predominantly light|32.2||81.2||
||Mixed but predominantly salvaged|40.7||85.4||
|**ROOF**<br>(Construction<br>materials of roof)|Strong|10.6|< 0.0001|58.2|< 0.0001|
||Light|18.9||83.4||
||Salvaged / makeshift|19.2||89.7||
||Mixed but predominantly strong|16.4||74.9||
||Mixed but predominantly light|32.1||82.4||
||Mixed but predominantly salvaged|37.3||85.4||
|**WATER**<br>(Type of water<br>facility)|Community water system-own|33.3|< 0.0001|51.6|< 0.0001|
||Community water system–shared|24.0||75.2||
||Deep well–own|19.2||34.5||
||Deep well–shared|26.5||66.2||
||Artesian well–own|25.0||41.0||
||Artesian well–shared|27.3||68.9||
||Dug/shallow well–own|22.2||72.5||
||Dug/shallow well–shared|14.3||9.1||
||River, stream, lake, …|0.0||79.8||
||Bottled water|9.1||8.9||
||Others|28.1||58.1||
|**TOIL**<br>(Type of toilet<br>facility)|Water-sealed. . . own|6.7|< 0.0001|55.7|< 0.0001|
||Water-sealed. . .–shared|18.9||70.2||
||Closed pit|11.6||81.6||
||Open pit|19.3||80.3||
||No toilet|34.3||87.2||
||Others|33.1||83.3||
|**FSHORT**<br>(Experienced food<br>shortage)|Without food shortage|13.2|< 0.0001|64.5|< 0.0001|
||With food shortage|46.7||88.2||



N.A. - not available. 

https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber/vol20/iss2/6 DOI: 10.59588/2243-786X.1328 

6 

Arcilla et al.: Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitori 

CORRELatES Of pOVERty: EVIDENCE fROM thE CBMS Data 

aRCILLa, R.g., Et aL. 39 

A lower poverty incidence was observed among households in Pasay City who were engaged in crop farming and gardening, livestock/ poultry, food services, entertainment services, and computer communication.  On the other hand, a higher poverty incidence was seen among households who were engaged in maintenance services, transportation/storage/communication, and construction. 

This is contrary to the findings from Mogpog, Marinduque where higher poverty incidences were observed among households engaged in crop farming and gardening, livestock/poultry, fishing, forestry, transportation, storage and communication, mining and quarrying, and construction. While the following economic 

activities were significant indicators of lower poverty incidence: wholesale/retail, and community/social/personal services. 

Households’ basic needs such as tenure status of house and lot, construction materials of wall and roof, types of water and toilet facilities, and experience of food shortage were significant predictors of the poverty status of households for both Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque (Table 4). 

Ownership of household consumer durables such as TV, VHS, computer, refrigerator, electric iron, LPG/gas stove/range, washing machine, microwave oven, telephone/cellphone, aircon, and vehicles was significantly associated with poverty incidence (Table 5).  Specifically, poverty 

## **Table 5** 

_Distribution of poor households by household’s consumer durables and area_ 

|**VARIABLE**|**CATEGORIES**|**PASAY CITY**|**PASAY CITY**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|**MOGPOG,**<br>**MARINDUQUE**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|
|**TV**<br>(Own TV)|Without|22.1|< 0.0001|81.9|< 0.0001|
||With|12.3||53.6||
|**VHS**<br>(Own VHS / VCD / DVDplayer)|Without|20.5|< 0.0001|77.4|< 0.0001|
||With|9.7||48.5||
|**COMPUTER**<br>(Own computer)|Without|15.4|< 0.0001|68.0|< 0.0001|
||With|4.1||20.8||
|**REF**<br>(Own ref)|Without|20.7|< 0.0001|77.8|< 0.0001|
||With|7.9||35.3||
|**IRON**<br>(Own electric iron)|Without|22.9|< 0.0001|80.7|< 0.0001|
||With|10.7||47.5||
|**STOVE**<br>(Own LPG /gas stove / range)|Without|23.2|< 0.0001|79.2|< 0.0001|
||With|10.8||46.1||
|**WMACH**<br>(Own washingmachine)|Without|18.0|< 0.0001|73.0|< 0.0001|
||With|8.5||32.4||
|**MICROW**<br>(Own microwave oven)|Without|15.1|< 0.0001|68.4|< 0.0001|
||With|5.5||20.1||
|**PHONE**<br>(Own telephone / cellphone)|Without|25.3|< 0.0001|78.1|< 0.0001|
||With|8.4||43.9||
|**AIRCON**<br>(Own aircon)|Without|15.0|< 0.0001|67.4|< 0.0001|
||With|4.2||20.1||
|**CAR**<br>(Own vehicles)|Without|14.7|< 0.0001|70.7|< 0.0001|
||With|5.1||32.0||



Published by Animo Repository, 2011 

7 

DLSU Business & Economics Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 [2011], Art. 6 

40 DLSU BUSINESS & ECONOMICS REVIEW 

VOL. 20  NO. 2 

incidence was found to be much higher among households without these household consumer durables. 

Access to government or private organization programs on gender issues, peace and order, health, education, credit, and other programs were found to be significant predictors of the poverty status of households residing in Pasay City (Table 6).  A higher poverty incidence can be observed among households that received these programs compared to the households that did not receive them. Effect of government or private organization programs on the poverty status of household in Mogpog, Marinduque was not 

investigated since similar data were not available for Mogpog, Marinduque. 

_**Poverty Incidence Model.**_ The Pasay City poverty incidence regression model was found to be overall significant (p < 0.0001) with 18 significant correlates of poverty incidence enumerated in Table 7. Correlates which positively or directly affect barangay poverty incidence in Pasay City include AVE_HSIZE, PROP_SEX, PROP_OFWIND, PROP_THIRDSEX, PROP_FOODIND, PROP_ TENUR, PROP_WALL, PROP_WMACH, PROP_AIRC, and PROP_OTHPRIND. On the other hand, correlates which negatively or 

## **Table 6** 

_Distribution of poor households by household’s availment of programs, Pasay City_ 

|**VARIABLE**|**CATEGORIES**|**%**<br>**POOR**|**P-VALUE**|
|---|---|---|---|
|**SEXPROG**<br>(Received programs on gender issues)|Did not receive|13.5|< 0.0001|
||Received|18.9||
|**PEACEPROG**<br>(Received programs on peace and order)|Did not receive|13.3|0.0004|
||Received|14.3||
|**MEDHEAL**<br>(Received programs on health)|Did not receive|13.5|0.0164|
||Received|14.2||
|**MSCHOL**<br>(Received programs on education)|Did not receive|13.5|< 0.0001|
||Received|26.3||
|**MTRAININD**<br>(Received programs on livelihood training)|Did not receive|13.7|0.3034|
||Received|11.8||
|**ASSHLOTIND**<br>(Received programs on housing)|Did not receive|13.7|0.1992|
||Received|11.1||
|**CREDIND**<br>(Received credit programs)|Did not receive|13.6|0.0020|
||Received|19.0||
|**CLEANPROG**<br>(Received cleanliness programs)|Did not receive|13.7|0.7314|
||Received|13.5||
|**JOBPROG**<br>(Received employment programs)|Did not receive|13.6|0.2311|
||Received|15.7||
|**OTHPRIND**<br>(Received other programs)|Did not receive|13.3|< 0.0001|
||Received|17.9||



https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber/vol20/iss2/6 DOI: 10.59588/2243-786X.1328 

8 

Arcilla et al.: Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitori 

CORRELatES Of pOVERty: EVIDENCE fROM thE CBMS Data 

aRCILLa, R.g., Et aL. 41 

inversely affect barangay poverty incidence in Pasay City include PROP_BOARDIND, PROP_JOBIND, PROP_COMPUTIND, PROP_ COMPUTER, PROP_REF, PROP_PHONE, and PROP_CLEANPROG. 

There was no multicollinearity among the significant correlates under this poverty incidence 

model as supported by the tolerance and variance inflation statistics. Furthermore, this Pasay City poverty incidence model also satisfied normality (p = 0.9600), and consequently homoscedascity, as well as independence assumption of the residuals (p<DW = 0.7531 and p>DW = 0.2469). The adjusted R-square of this poverty incidence 

## **Table 7** 

_Significant correlates in Pasay City poverty incidence model_ 

|**CORRELATES**|**PARAMETER**<br>**ESTIMATE***|**P-VALUE**|
|---|---|---|
|**AVE_HSIZE**<br>(Average household size)|0.10068<br>(0.01189)|<0.0001|
|<br>**PROP_SEX**<br>(Proportion of households who are headed by a male person)|0.28332<br>(0.07901)|0.0004|
|<br>**PROP_OFWIND**<br>(Proportion of household with an OFW member)|0.43122<br>(0.12462)|<0.0007|
|<br>**PROP_THIRDSEX**<br>(Proportion of households with members belonging to the third sex)|1.46496<br>(0.46236)|0.0016|
|<br>**PROP_BOARDIND**<br>(Proportion of households with boarders/bedspacers)|-1.03444<br>(0.25858)|<0.0001|
|<br>**PROP_JOBIND**<br>(Proportion of household heads who are employed)|-0.12098<br>(0.06091)|0.0485|
|<br>**PROP_FOODIND**<br>(Proportion of households engaged in food services)|0.64818<br>(0.24813)|0.0097|
|<br>**PROP_COMPUTIND**<br>(Proportion of households engaged in computer communication)|-1.91134<br>(0.66630)|0.0046|
|<br>**PROP_CNSIND**<br>(Proportion of households engaged in construction)|-0.67962<br>(0.16586)|<0.0001|
|<br>**PROP_TENUR**<br>(Proportion of households whose housing units/lot are not owned)|0.18870<br>(0.02890)|<0.0001|
|<br>~~**PROP**~~**_**~~**WALL**~~<br>(Proportion of households living in housing units with walls made of light<br>or salvaged/makeshift materials)|0.18761<br>(0.05066)|0.0003|
|<br>**PROP_COMPUTER**<br>(Proportion of households who own computer)|-0.22789<br>(0.08066)|0.0052|
|<br>**PROP_REF**<br>(Proportion of households who own refrigerator)|-0.45935<br>(0.06918)|<0.0001|
|<br>**PROP_WMACH**<br>(Proportion of households who own washing machine)|1.6865<br>(0.06417)|0.0093|
|<br>**PROP_PHONE**<br>(Proportion of households who own telephone/cellphone)|-0.27615<br>(0.06104)|<0.0001|
|<br>**PROP_AIRC**<br>(Proportion of households who own aircon)|0.31213<br>(0.08313)|0.0002|
|<br>**PROP_CLEANPROG**<br>(Proportion of households who received cleanliness programs)|-0.05871<br>(0.01855)|0.0018|
|<br>**PROP_OTHPRIND**<br>(Proportion of households who received other programs)|0.13592<br>(0.03523)|0.0002|



* Numbers inside parenthesis are standard error of the estimate. 

Published by Animo Repository, 2011 

9 

DLSU Business & Economics Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 [2011], Art. 6 

42 DLSU BUSINESS & ECONOMICS REVIEW 

VOL. 20  NO. 2 

## **Table 8** 

_Significant correlates in Mogpog poverty incidence model_ 

|**Table 8**<br>_Significant correlates in Mogpog poverty incidence model_|||
|---|---|---|
|**CORRELATES**|**PARAMETER**<br>**ESTIMATE***|**P-VALUE**|
|**AVE_HSIZE**<br>(Average household size)|0.12249<br>(0.04331)|0.0081|
|**PROP_CROPIND**<br>(Proportion of households engaged in cropfarmingandgardening)|-0.19126<br>(0.06606)|0.0069|
|**PROP_TV**<br>(Proportion of households who own TV)|-0.58926<br>(0.21388)|0.0097|
|**PROP_IRON**<br>(Proportion of households who own electric iron)|-0.42589<br>(0.17283)|0.0195|



* Number inside parenthesis are standard error of the estimate. 

## **Table 9** 

_Significant correlates in the poverty incidence model for the combined data of Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque_ 

|**CORRELATES**|**PARAMETER**<br>**ESTIMATE***|**P-VALUE**|
|---|---|---|
|**AREA**<br>(Locationof the barangay)|-0.37893<br>(0.02167)|<0.0001|
|**AVE_HSIZE**<br>(Averagehousehold size)|0.10355<br>(0.01133)|<0.0001|
|**PROP_TENUR**<br>(Proportion of households whose housing units/lot are<br>not owned)|0.23787<br>(0.03569)|<0.0001|
|**PROP_PHONE**<br>(Proportionof households who own telephone/cellphone)|-0.65644<br>(0.04200)|<0.0001|



* Number inside parenthesis are standard error of the estimate. 

model was 84.77% indicating that 84.77% of the variation in poverty incidence at the barangay level is accounted for by the significant correlates adjusted for the number of correlates used. 

On the other hand, the significant Mogpog poverty incidence regression model (p < 0.0001) had four correlates of poverty incidence having an adjusted R-square of 79.83%. The four significant correlates are enumerated in Table 8. 

A positive relationship was observed between poverty incidence and AVE_HSIZE. This implied that barangays with high average household 

sizes have higher poverty incidences. On the other hand, inverse relationships were observed between poverty incidence and the following correlates: PROP_CROPIND, PROP_TV, and PROP_IRON. This implied that the higher the proportions of households who own TV, who own electric iron, and who engage in crop farming or gardening in a barangay, the lower the poverty incidence in this barangay. 

This Mogpog poverty incidence model passed the diagnostic checking performed on its residuals. Tolerance and variance inflation 

https://animorepository.dlsu.edu.ph/ber/vol20/iss2/6 DOI: 10.59588/2243-786X.1328 

10 

Arcilla et al.: Correlates of Poverty: Evidence from the Community-Based Monitori 

CORRELatES Of pOVERty: EVIDENCE fROM thE CBMS Data 

aRCILLa, R.g., Et aL. 43 

statistics indicated absence of multicollinearity. It satisfied assumptions of normality (p = 0.5294) and independence of residuals (p < DW = 0.6055 and p > DW = 0.3945). 

Multiple regression analysis was likewise performed on the combined CBMS data collected from Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque. Results showed that the model was significant (p < 0.0001) with four correlates that are not multicollinear (Table 9). This model has an adjusted R-square of 91.40% satisfying normality (p = 0.2540) and independence (p < DW = 0.3287 and p > DW = 0.6713) of residuals assumptions. 

An inverse relationship was observed between barangay level poverty incidence and location of the barangay, that is, lower poverty incidences are observed in barangays located in a rural area. Also, the proportion of households who own telephone/cellphone negatively affect barangay level poverty incidence. This implied that the higher the proportions of households who own telephone/cellphone in a barangay, the lower the poverty incidence is in that barangay. On the other hand, average household size and proportion of households whose housing units/lot are not owned positively affect barangay level poverty incidence. 

## **CONCLUSIONS** 

Utilizing the 2005 CBMS census data, this study identified correlates of poverty for Pasay City and Mogpog, Marinduque, selected urban and rural areas in the Philippines, respectively.  The results from the bivariate and multivariate analyses showed that for both areas, average household size positively affect barangay level poverty incidence. It is imperative that family planning programs be aggressively disseminated to properly educate 

couples and adults on responsible parenthood and on the direct correlation between large household size and higher poverty incidence. 

Further analyses on the combined CBMS data from both areas allowed the assessment of the effect of the location of a barangay (whether urban or rural) on the barangay level poverty incidence. Results showed that lower poverty incidences were observed in barangays located in an urban area, that is, households located in urban areas were better-off relative to those in rural areas. Barangays having higher proportions of households who own telephone/cellphone in a barangay had lower poverty incidences, while barangays with higher proportions of households whose housing units/lot are not owned had higher poverty incidences. Hence, appropriate housing programs should be studied and implemented in order to achieve poverty reduction. 

## **REFERENCES** 

- Albert, J. R. G. & Collado, P. M. (2004). _Profile and Determinants of Poverty in the Philippines_ . Proceedings of the 9[th] National Convention on Statistics, Mandaluyong City, Philippines 

- Balisacan, A. M. (1997). _In Search of Proxy Indicators for Poverty Targeting: Toward a Framework for a Poverty Indicator and Monitoring System_ . Paper prepared for the National Statistics Office’s Component in the UNDP-Assisted Project: Strengthening Institutional Mechanisms for the Convergence of Poverty Alleviation Efforts. 

- National Statistical Coordination Board [NSCB]. (2006). Glossary of Terms. Retrieved on January 19, 2006 from http://www.nscb.gov. ph/glossary/inc.asp 

Published by Animo Repository, 2011 

11 

